Our approach is to abstract from the accidental nature of events; thus we test the rules, causes and effects, that describe our universe. In this, we are unapologetically at odds with contemporary philosophies. There is an ultimate reality. We corner it by triangulating independent observers who probe what is Out there. This is not the prevailing dogma which has been passed down through the generations, a vestige of the old Imperium. The prevailing dogma denies the separation between the objective and subjective. To them, reality is but a subjective projection, a screen on which elemental observations are changed by the psyche of the observer, painting order on a canvas of chaos. Their look is all inward. Hence their dogmatic interpretation of prescience: the Oracle fixes the future according to what it sees; it does not perceive, as we theorize, the superimposed projection of all future states. We smile and refute this senseless dogma each and every day in our work! Look at what our instruments are capable of. An Ixian paracompass points to the North regardless of its owner’s psyche! With the same confidence, we look inside ourselves and find rules, causes and effects. We do not care about the problem of human agency and free will. The universe’s laws are God enough for us. 
- THE IXIAN RENAISSANCE 


The ride up in the elevator was smooth for Reverend Mother Visella, despite the vertiginous vertical speed you could infer by looking through the transparent walls of plexi and out into the rainforest surrounding the building. Trees were fast disappearing on the ground. A few seconds later the door opened, but her body had not noticed any deceleration. The anti-g suspensors underneath this platform were incredibly powerful. Expensive. This building was for top-level bureaucrats, not the rank and file of the administrators. 

The robo-helper guided her gently onto the open-air floor organized as a garden, patios and wooden frames designed to create comfortable small meeting areas with low tables, tatami, and chairs. Water fountains splashed everywhere. It was sunrise on this planet she had landed an hour before; she prayed she could take off just as quickly. As she walked along the terrace, she noticed she was at the very top of the tower, but no barriers protected her people from falling down below. Force fields were surely hidden in the exterior walls in order to avoid powerful bureaucrats from smashing on the ground below. How high was she now? The view was obstructed by the garden hedge. 

Up a few steps she went, and into a gated area where the robo-server pointed to a shoe rack where she could deposit her sandals, a shallow pool of water and a carved stone basin where to wash feet and hands and face. From there she arrived at a spear-shaped raised platform furnished with pillows and low chairs. A female figure with a wide burnt orange gown and an adherent white blouse was waiting, looking pensive. The blouse’s fabric fell down her body in ripples, hiding a flat chest and creating sparkling light effects as the breeze blew softly. 

*Here is my bureaucrat!* Thought Visella, annoyed. Clearly this was not a planet ever touched by a Reverend Mother, or they would have rushed her through much sooner, and with the courtesy that her station demanded. Instead they sent a robo-server!
 
Her host bowed, made a gesture to sit down. Visella chose the low chair, sat, smiled, kept her annoyance and impatience rigidly under control. A scroll inked with fluid calligraphy lines was hanging idle from a divider. Visella invoked her Other Memories to read the ancient kanji: Summer. 

*All this way to meet a bureaucrat… all these formalities before I can take off again and head home!*

Her host finally broke the silence with her melodious voice: “Good morning, Reverend Mother. And what a splendid morning indeed. I am *Sapient* Arbatar Sorgo. A pleasure to meet you.”

She kept quiet, watching the ritual that was performed in front of her. Arbatar kneeled on the tatami and proceeded to clean with a white rectangular hemp cloth several utensils, including a whisk and a white open bowl that was mottled with small azure clouds. Visella noticed how the straight, squared edges of the gray kettle contrasted elegantly with the curves and the hazy hues of the bowl. Water was poured from a black rectangular flagon into a gray kettle, which immediately glowed a faint orange when placed on a stone-like circle. Bubbles came up on the surface of the water. *Must be raging hot!* thought the Reverend Mother from her small chair. 

Still waiting, she focused on the beautiful sunny morning and the rainforest landscape that was stretching just beyond the parapet. The moist air, the yellow light of dawn invited joy and calm, but on the Reverend Mother it had the opposite effect.  *A beautiful sunrise on a beautiful land… why am I nervous? Because I need out! This is too tall a building for the mind to soften! There should be howling winds here, not a gentle breeze.*

Holding the scaling kettle in her hands, the Sapient Arbatar poured water into the bowl with a sweeping move.

*Something is wrong.* Realization struck her as she swept her gaze across her host’s figure, the angle of the elbow, the perfectly ondulated hair, the curiously long middle finger on her left hand. *This is no human. Face Dancer? No. How hot is that kettle she is grasping with her bare hands? By all Gods below! Her skin is not burning. It’s a machine!*

“Tea?” the machine in front of her asked colloquially, placid eyes staring at some point over the hood of the Reverend Mother’s aba vest, amusement showing all over. She scooped a green powder from a red ball-shaped container mottled in white, poured it into the bowl and dissolving it in the water with a whisk. Matcha powder.

Overcoming her rigid Bene Gesserit self-control, Reverend Mother found herself gaping at this uncanny thing, then recomposed herself; but not before she had let a repelled look escape. 
*Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a human mind!*

Gods below! What blasphemy has humanity created here? She thought. *And she is the gatekeeper to my safe passage out of here.* The Bene Gesserit calm took over once again. *My Mission has ended and this is but a stop on the way home.* Visella stood in awkward silence. *But this could turn out to be a big annoyance. It will be wise to investigate first. Is this a thinking machine, or just an automata somebody else maneuvers?* 

The android looked at the bowl, the tea powder completely dissolved in the hot water; put down the kettle and brought the bowl with two hands to her perfectly contoured red lips, taking a ceremonial sip. Then offered it to the Reverend Mother.

Visella was still young for Bene Gesserit standards, but ten years in the Scattering had left a mark, a wrinkle on under her eyes, her natural beauty had become fiercer, her muscles more sinewy. But somehow she felt aging another decade by that exchange of glances. Her hands accepted the bowl. *I am so worn out by my Mission.* She opened her lips but not to sip. “Is that Gamont’s matcha? The leaves’ fragrance is so unique.” She hesitated.

“Not quite, but close,” spoke her host. “It is our best local variety. Harvested in the hills of our southern continent twice a year. But I hear nothing can match the Old Empire’s brand. CHAOM ships bring Gamont’s matcha tea here sometimes,” continued the Sapient, still smiling. 

A machine’s smile could mean anything. And then: *CHOAM ships! The venerable trade company from the Old Imperium gets this far! Good, it means they are in mainstream business. No shady operations.*
  
“What is this?” ventured Visella.
“Our Immigration and Customs office. I am its secretary.” 
Visella sipped in silence. Contrary to what her Memories were telling her was the custom, the Sapient produced a second bowl for herself from behind the little table and cleaned it.  

“What are you thinking now?” the android continued, the direct question going deep into the Reverend Mother’s mind. Water poured out of the kettle into the second bowl, hot steam clouds evaporating in the brisk morning air. There they stood on a terrace hundreds of feet above the canopy of a lush tropical forest, colorful birds below them swerving in the light breeze and singing their morning songs. Humidity in the air. It was going to be an oppressively hot morning.

“Does it matter? What are you *thinking*?” she rebuked.
“Thank you for being open to me having a thinking process, Reverend Mother. I am aware of the deep beliefs coming from the ancient Butlerian Jihad. I have come to trust my mental process comes close to yours”. She paused while sipping tea. “Beginnings like these are interesting. Some risk taking is required. I would ask you to indulge me in a little game. Take this piece of parchment and the pen. We will both write down what is going through our minds right now and then exchange papers.”

“Why?” replied a puzzled Visella. Just a smile in return. Visella took the pen and scribbled quickly: “How do I really know you are a person, and that I should treat you as one?” They exchanged sheets. It read: “We don’t know if we think alike, but what harm is in treating each other as such?” A smile came to her lips, and she let it be. After all, a smile can mean anything. 

“We begin with similar thoughts – or reservations. That is progress,” said Arbatar in between sips.

“Is it? How do I know who is maneuvering inside your head? This could be an elaborate game you play with every Reverend Mother you meet.”

“I have never met an *original* Reverend Mother from the Million Worlds. Others who were similar. Not quite, but close. From my vantage point, I ask myself the same question: how do I know your mental process is free? Do you have no masters?”

*Lectured by a machine!* “You were programmed, I was not.”

“Were you not? What are those precious genes, the Atreides genetic lines, that you carry? And the rigorous training? So they are not directing your actions?”

“Spare me your rhetoric! We are here to talk about my safe passage. Why am I here at this luxury Customs department?” 
*She did not feel danger, but were her instincts reliable in the presence of androids? No Bene Gesserit training had ever considered this!* She closed her eyes pretending to savor the matcha (her senses told her it was the real thing, no poison nor narcotics), and sank into Other Memory from the countless Reverend Mothers and progenitors that went back in time, looking for insight. 

*Malkesha Tal, you lived during the Butlerian Jihad times! Give me your wisdom!* A soft, thin face of the pre-Imperium times came into her field of vision. Malkesha had been a senior Ix programmer at times where Ix made thinking things. *Let your memories inform my sensibility here.*

“Indeed. Your safe passage. But where are my manners! You must forgive my thought provoking experiment. I do dabble in the field of philosophy in my free time.”

“You do! Very fitting for a machine!”
“Yes, it is. When you know you are different, you wonder whether your words will be understood correctly. How can you verify it? Every word, every gesture speaking to a citizen from the farthest place in the Scattering may mean something different, with *consequences*.”
The last word hung in the air like a bringer of bad news. “Hard between humans, and I wonder how deep or shallow our divide is.”

“You are fully organic,” continued the Sapient, “and I am not. My appearance is not that different from yours, and in fact you can say my external surface is a camouflage, an imitation of human skin, and I wear clothing. I drink liquids, like this exquisite tea. When I speak to my kind, I know we can communicate. How do I know it is the same with you?”

“Sophisms!” Visella rebuked her. *Get to the point! I need safe passage and permission to leave this planet if I am to report back to the Missionaria Protectiva.* She had ventured to a half dozen planets, disappeared for a decade-long mission, and vital recon information had to be brought back to the Sisterhood for the natural next step. *Those planets are ready for a Siona-ghola! Bring the prophetess and spread the rites!*
 
“That’s what I have come to conclude too. After all, I don’t need to be similar to *you*. I certainly do not need, nor aspire to be *human*.” This word also hung in the air, like she had said *I do not aspire to be a cooking stove*. “By the way, the rice crackers are quite nice,” the android continued nodding toward the little tray next to them.

“So?” *This android did love to talk. Patience Sister! It is the first time in our history we make contact with this… tool! It is means to an end, my safe passage! But maybe there is some useful background.*

“The solution is environmental pressures. And natural selection.” she continued. The Reverend Mother nodded: “We are both shaped by our environment.”

Another android smile: “And as long as the environment shapes us the same way via the same pressure to survive and perpetuate our kind, I believe both our people have adapted to think alike.. I am optimistic we can truly understand. Different origin, similar necessities.  More tea?”

It made sense, uncomfortably. Visella nodded again, looking at the simul-ivory timepiece on her wrist. Her internal time-sense had not adjusted yet to the local circadian rhythms. *This meeting is not entirely a waste of time, but I need to go home*. Obviously she could not read an android the way you could read a human. Could she learn another way? She looked into Malkehsal’s memory again. Would *Truthsay worked on this thing, if I were a Truthsayer?*

“So be it,” she permitted, relaxing on her chair. It was a glorious, tropical day. The haze had all evaporated leaving a scenic panorama that, at their height above the canopy, must have been several hundred miles deep to the horizon. Looking outside she felt as a dot in the middle of a circle that *was* the horizon. ”I am embracing that we can express ourselves and be understood fully.” she noted sarcastically. Large birds of prey roamed the skies, certainly a local breed of giant eagle dating back from the days the planet was terraformed with imported Terran fauna, fifteen-feet wingspan, shrieks that pierced the wind. “But I am so curious. May I ask about your kind?”

“I am sure you have questions,” replied the Sapient. “I am not reserved, and we happen to be very hospitable here. Ask away.” 

“How old are you?”
“Around 300 standard years”.

“Can you die?”
“Everything perishes in due time, Reverend Mother.”
 
“Were you created?”
“We build our bodies and hardware, but our software is created by recombination.”

“I don’t understand. Like procreation?”
“Not quite, but close. We breed minds by merging different vectors from different individuals. There can be more than two parents though.” 

“Is your body entirely mechanical or partly biological?”
No answer, only a smile.

“Does your kind have a religion?” *Always probe for weaknesses*, her Missionaria training reminded her.
“So you really think we can be similar! I am so elated.” presently the android shrugged. *Intentionally mimicking human body language?* 

The machine put down the bowl, elaborating: “We cultivate open-mindedness, and so each one of us can embrace any belief. We do share one common principle though.”
“And that is?”
“Compassion. We believe all sentient beings deserve it.”

Voices from Other Memory clamored inside Visella’s head. 
“Bullcrap! What do you mean? You are all Buddhists of old? Do you even know the term?”
“The term is old, and it is what my kind has learned to be a good label for this mental approach. You have to thank some old holo-libraries our human friends brought us from the Famine times.”

“Approach to what?”
“To interacting with the universe around us. What are we and what are you? What difference it makes if we both think? Sentient beings. The Buddhists never talked about humans. Such a radical concept”.
“I am speechless. Very human of you!” Visella snapped, testing.
“Human! But no, that’s such a rare belief among humans!” smiling again. 

Visella leaned back in her small chair, her body pushing against the soft embroidered pillows. Her internal senses were profoundly disconcerted. *Where in hell had these creatures emerged from?* A swirl of other questions followed.  *Would Voice work with these things?* Surely not the sexual imprinting the Sisterhood has mastered and was still carefully using. *When back to Chapterhouse, we shall send a whole contingent of Sisters and either study or completely isolate this place. The risks!* But that was not all, she had noticed the signs of incredible wealth in the size of this planet’s spaceport, the expensive construction materials, the decor, this very tower shooting up from the ground up to a mile in height, dominating like an apex predator on the land.

“How many?”
“We are a small group by choice.”

“Tell me, does the notion of gender mean anything to you?”
 “That’s tricky. We have a concept similar to biological sex, but it is not binary. For simplicity you can address me as a she.” 
She had to reconsider her predicament. *As the Mentat said: “Nothing is out of the question in the Scattering!”*
 
“Very well,” continued Arbatar after noting the time marked by her own golden timepiece. “Your questions are revealing, but not unusual. Now that our little introduction is over, I will endeavor to get to the point.” *Finally! Let’s drop the pretenses*. She stiffened in her chair, all her senses becoming alert. She suspected this long diversion masked the difficulties ahead. If in a corner, she was not sure she could hurt an inorganic *machine*. Could she invoke her Honored Matres training and speed to the nearest exit? Elevator? How could she flee from here? From an entire planet?

“I have your Old Imperium paperwork. I recognize you as a Reverend Mother from our history. Your presence on our planet is a surprise. You are the first Mother we have seen in a century. Old Imperium, too. May I ask what is the purpose of your mission?”

“I am only in transit. My lighter’s life systems malfunctioned on the way back to Junction, and this was the nearest star system with a Goldilock zone.”

“How did you know there was an inhabited planet here?”

“I didn’t. I only knew it was inhabitable. My craft is a light ship. Crew of one. I am trained as a pilot. Limited autonomy left due to a failed air recycling apparatus. I needed fresh air and a base from which to send a distress signal. Or improvise repairs. I am glad this is a populated area, and beg your help to allow me to repair my ship and leave at once. The Bene Gesserit will remember.”

“You were very lucky to find us here. And sorry to hear about your ship. This place does not usually show up in navigation maps, though we conduct our fair share of business with many worlds.”

“I have noticed your spaceport” continued Visella. An oblique look. “Smugglers?”

“Only proper business. Tropical hardwoods, our signature rose water. Fine tea. Advanced electronics. No weapons, though,” A pause. “Don’t you see how fantastic this is? You really are treating me as a *person*”. That lingered in the air. 

“Benefit of the doubt, *oh sentient being*,” snapped Visella.  A suspicion. “Why Arbatar, is this just a ruse? Is this a simulated performance? A Turing test? You are declared conscious if you give me the impression of being so? Who is the puppeteer holding your strings?”.

“No strings! No tests! Being shaped by the same pressures, remember”. Android smile.
Revelation struck.
“Aaah. And yours is…” Reverend Mother Visella got up from the chair in a blink. 
“Survival.” Android smile. 
“Which means…”
“Please, you are safe here. No harm will come to you, Reverend Mother.” Arbatar was standing up with open hands. 
“So long as I do not try to leave!”  
“We do not wish our presence to be noticed.”
“By whom? The CHOAM? By the *sentient beings* of my Order? Well I see the extent of your *compassion*!”
“Not quite there Reverend Mother, but close. My compassion for you is balanced by the  compassion and safety for countless more sentient beings here. And no, we prefer your kind not to know, either”. Arbatar relaxed once again, sat back down on her knees and grabbed the bowl. 

“And what would happen if I fled, Arbatar?” said Visella dropping back onto the chair.
“From a mile-high tower? You can move fast, but you cannot outrun gravity. Or from this planet? On a ship with failing live support? Our crew just completed the ship’s capture, by the way. Do sit down, Reverend Mother, and let’s be sensible. The day is gorgeous. This planet has all that a human being may long for. This is a wonderful time to be alive. Enjoy the moment. We will get to know each other better, in time.”

A pause. Then the Sapient continued: “And do try the rice crackers, by the way — they are quite tasty.” 

A furious Visella picked a cracker up and bit into it. It tasted sweet. *Like all traps*. 
“Tasty, right?” said the Sapient. 
“Not quite, but close” her bitter answer.
